Documentation for adding new problems in contributing.md (#410)
JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl: docs/src/contributing.md

    - `src/PureJuMP/problem_name.jl`
    - `src/Meta/problem_name.jl`
In both cases, the function must have the same name `problem_name` as the file.

> The function should be exported from `src/ADNLPProblems/problem_name.jl` and `src/PureJuMP/problem_name.jl`. Do not add exports in `src/Meta/problem_name.jl`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function should be only exported from `src/ADNLPProblems/problem_name.jl` and `src/PureJuMP/problem_name.jl`.
```

```

* Problems modeled with `ADNLPModels` should be type-stable, i.e. they should all have keyword argument `type::Type{T} = Float64` where `T` is the type of the initial guess and the type used by the `NLPModel` API.

> * In particular, the initial point `x0` should be a `Vector{T}`, the objective evaluation should return values of type `T`, and the `name` keyword should be passed to `ADNLPModel`/`ADNLSModel` with a meaningful problem name.

Reviewer: In the previous sentence it already says "`T` is the type of the initial guess and the type used by the `NLPModel` API"

```

* Problems modeled with `ADNLPModels` should be type-stable, i.e. they should all have keyword argument `type::Type{T} = Float64` where `T` is the type of the initial guess and the type used by the `NLPModel` API.

> * In particular, the initial point `x0` should be a `Vector{T}`, and the `name` keyword should be passed to `ADNLPModel`/`ADNLSModel` with a meaningful problem name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `name` keyword should be passed to `ADNLPModel`/`ADNLSModel` with a meaningful problem name.
```
the initial point comment was already made in previous point

* Implementations in `ADNLPProblems` and `PureJuMP` must use the same initial point, variable bounds, and constraint bounds; compare `arglina` in [`src/ADNLPProblems/arglina.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/src/ADNLPProblems/arglina.jl) and [`src/PureJuMP/arglina.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/src/PureJuMP/arglina.jl).
* The implemented objective function must be callable at the starting point.
* For `ADNLPModels` problems, the objective should return values of type `T` from `type::Type{T}` and the initial point should be typed consistently (`x0::Vector{T}`).
* Pass a meaningful `name` keyword to `ADNLPModel` constructors, for example `name = "arglina"` in [`src/ADNLPProblems/arglina.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/src/ADNLPProblems/arglina.jl).
* For constrained problems, ensure in-place constraint evaluations (e.g., `cons_nln!`) are allocation-free, for example the checks in [`test/test-utils.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/test/test-utils.jl).

> * Objective function evaluations should have minimal allocations, for example `@allocated obj(nlp, x0)` in the same test style used by [`test/test-utils.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/test/test-utils.jl).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Objective function evaluations should have minimal allocations.
```
There are no tests on objective allocations now.

* For variable-size problems, validate at multiple sizes (for example `n = 5`, `n = default_nvar`, and a larger `n`) and check all of the following, e.g. [`arglina`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/src/ADNLPProblems/arglina.jl) and [`test/test-scalable.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/test/test-scalable.jl):
  - model instantiation succeeds for each tested `n`;
  - effective `nvar` matches the intended rule (including any internal adjustment such as odd `n` or `4k + 3` constraints);
  - if `n` is internally adjusted, the effective value is the closest feasible one to the requested `n`, and a warning is emitted;
  - metadata formulas (`nvar`, `nnzh`, `nnzj`, etc.) match the instantiated model values.

> * Optional (recommended): provide a local solver sanity check showing that a standard solver can solve the model from the provided starting point, see example below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Optional (recommended): provide in the PR a local solver sanity check showing that a standard solver can solve the model from the provided starting point, see example below.
```

```julia
using OptimizationProblems, OptimizationProblems.ADNLPProblems
using NLPModelsIpopt

nlp = problem_name()
stats = ipopt(nlp)
stats.status
```

For least-squares problems, you may also run the same check with `problem_name(use_nls=true)`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- [ ] The implemented objective, constraints, and bounds match the mathematical problem definition from the cited reference/documentation.

**Implementation**
- [ ] Objective and constraint values agree (ADNLPProblems vs PureJuMP) within tolerance at test points.
- [ ] Number of variables and constraints match.
- [ ] For `type::Type{T}`, `x0 isa Vector{T}` and objective values are of type `T`.
- [ ] `ADNLPModel`/`ADNLSModel` constructors receive a meaningful `name` keyword.

**Sanity**
- [ ] Objective is callable at the starting point and does not return NaN (unless documented).
- [ ] Model instantiates without error for different types, e.g. Float32 and Float64.
- [ ] For scalable problems, changing `n` updates `nvar` and all related meta fields, and the effective number of variables remains as close as possible to the requested `n` when internal adjustments are required.

**Zero-Allocation**
- [ ] All in-place APIs (constraints, residuals) are allocation-free.
- [ ] No unnecessary allocations in tight loops or callbacks.
- [ ] Objective evaluation has minimal allocations (ideally allocation-free in performance-critical paths).

**Least-Squares & In-Place APIs**

> - [ ] If least-squares, ADNLP constructor supports `nls=true/false` for both ADNLPModel and ADNLSModel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] If least squares, ADNLP constructor supports `nls=true/false` for both ADNLPModel and ADNLSModel.
```

> - [ ] In-place nonlinear constraint evaluation (`cons_nln!(nlp, x, cx)`) and least-squares residuals (`residual!`) are allocation-free.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] In-place nonlinear constraint evaluations (`cons_nln!(nlp, x, cx)`) and least squares residuals (`residual!`) are allocation-free.
```

> - [ ] For least-squares, objectives for NLP and NLS agree (or differ by a factor of 2, as appropriate).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] For least squares problems, objectives for NLP and NLS must agree (or differ by a factor of 2, as appropriate).
```

export function_name

function function_name(; n::Int = default_nvar, type::Type{T} = Float64, kwargs...) where {T} 
  # define f (ensure f(x0) is of type T)

>  # define x0 (ensure x0 isa Vector{T})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # define x0 (ensure x0 isa Vector{T})
```

  # nlp = ADNLPModels.ADNLPModel(f, x0, name = "function_name"; kwargs...)
  return nlp
end
```

## Validating new problems

* Ensure all meta fields are accurate and complete, e.g. `:origin`, `:objtype`, and `:name` in [`src/Meta/arglina.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/src/Meta/arglina.jl).
* Implementations in `ADNLPProblems` and `PureJuMP` must use the same initial point, variable bounds, and constraint bounds; compare `arglina` in [`src/ADNLPProblems/arglina.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/src/ADNLPProblems/arglina.jl) and [`src/PureJuMP/arglina.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/src/PureJuMP/arglina.jl).

> * The implemented objective function must be callable at the starting point, e.g. `obj(nlp, nlp.meta.x0)` in [`src/ADNLPProblems/lanczos1.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/src/ADNLPProblems/lanczos1.jl).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The implemented objective function must be callable at the starting point.
```
Here I don't see what the link was helping with

> * For `ADNLPModels` problems, the objective should return values of type `T` from `type::Type{T}` and the initial point should be typed consistently (`x0::Vector{T}`), for example `Float32` in [`src/ADNLPProblems/brownal.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/src/ADNLPProblems/brownal.jl).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For `ADNLPModels` problems, the objective should return values of type `T` from `type::Type{T}` and the initial point should be typed consistently (`x0::Vector{T}`).
```

* Objective function evaluations should have minimal allocations, for example `@allocated obj(nlp, x0)` in the same test style used by [`test/test-utils.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/test/test-utils.jl).
* For variable-size problems, validate at multiple sizes (for example `n = 5`, `n = default_nvar`, and a larger `n`) and check all of the following, e.g. [`arglina`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/src/ADNLPProblems/arglina.jl) and [`test/test-scalable.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl/blob/main/test/test-scalable.jl):
  - model instantiation succeeds for each tested `n`;
  - effective `nvar` matches the intended rule (including any internal adjustment such as odd `n` or `4k + 3` constraints);
  - if `n` is internally adjusted, the effective value is the closest feasible one to the requested `n`, and a warning is emitted;
  - metadata formulas (`nvar`, `nnzh`, `nnzj`, etc.) match the instantiated model values.

> * Optional (recommended): provide a local solver sanity check showing that a standard solver can solve the model from the provided starting point, e.g. `ipopt(arglina())` or `ipopt(lanczos1())`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Optional (recommended): provide a local solver sanity check showing that a standard solver can solve the model from the provided starting point, see example below.
```

```julia
using OptimizationProblems, OptimizationProblems.ADNLPProblems
using NLPModelsIpopt

nlp = problem_name()
stats = ipopt(nlp)
stats.status
```

For least-squares problems, you may also run the same check with `problem_name(use_nls=true)`.

### Nonlinear Least Squares (NLS) Problems

If your problem is a nonlinear least squares (NLS), please follow these guidelines:

> * Use `ADNLSModels` for the ADNLPProblems implementation (see [ADNLPModels.jl documentation](https://jso.dev/ADNLPModels.jl/stable/)).

Reviewer: Not really. We make a second implementation, no?

Reviewer: Remove I would say

function function_name(; n::Int = default_nvar, type::Type{T} = Float64, kwargs...) where {T} 
  # define f 
  # define x0
  # ensure x0 isa Vector{T} and f(x) returns T
  # nlp = ADNLPModels.ADNLPModel(f, x0, name = "function_name"; kwargs...)
  return nlp
end
```

## Validating new problems

* Ensure all meta fields are accurate and complete.

> * For implementations in both `ADNLPProblems` and `PureJuMP`, use the same initial point, variable bounds, constraint bounds and explicitly compare the two models to ensure objective and constraint values match within a relative tolerance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Implementations in `ADNLPProblems` and `PureJuMP` must use the same initial point, variable bounds, constraint bounds. The two models must have matching objective and constraint values match (within a relative tolerance).
```

* The objective of implementations must be callable at the starting point.
* For `ADNLPModels` problems, the objective should return values of type `T` from `type::Type{T}` and the initial point should be typed consistently (`x0::Vector{T}`).
* Pass a meaningful `name` keyword to `ADNLPModel`/`ADNLSModel` constructors (typically matching the problem/function name).
* For least-squares problems, support the `use_nls=true/false` keyword to allow both `ADNLPModel` and `ADNLSModel` instantiation from the same problem.
* For least-squares problems, instantiate both `ADNLPModel` and `ADNLSModel` and ensure `residual!(nls, x, Fx)` is allocation-free and that the objectives agree (or differ by a factor of 2 for LS).
* For constrained problems, ensure in-place constraint evaluations (e.g., `cons_nln!`) are allocation-free.
* Objective evaluations should have minimal allocations (preferably zero allocations in hot paths).

> * For variable-size problems, validate at multiple sizes (for example `n = 5`, `n = default_nvar`, and a larger `n`) and check all of the following:

Reviewer: I think we are missing something important. the number of variables in the instatiated problem should be as close as possible to the provided `n`. Otherwise, had a warning.

  - model instantiation succeeds for each tested `n`;
  - effective `nvar` matches the intended rule (including any internal adjustment such as odd `n` or `4k + 3` constraints);
  - metadata formulas (`nvar`, `nnzh`, `nnzj`, etc.) match the instantiated model values.

Optional (recommended): provide a local solver sanity check showing that a standard solver can solve the model from the provided starting point. This is not a hard requirement for CI or review.

```julia
using OptimizationProblems, OptimizationProblems.ADNLPProblems
using NLPModelsIpopt

nlp = problem_name()
stats = ipopt(nlp)
stats.status
```

For least-squares problems, you may also run the same check with `problem_name(use_nls=true)`.

### Nonlinear Least Squares (NLS) Problems

If your problem is a nonlinear least squares (NLS), please follow these guidelines:

> * Use `ADNLSModels` for the ADNLPProblems implementation (see [ADNLPModels.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/ADNLPModels.jl)).

Reviewer: Maybe give the link to the documentation instead of the repo

  return nlp
end
```

## Validating new problems

* Ensure all meta fields are accurate and complete.
* For problem implementation in both ADNLP and PureJuMP, use the same initial point, variable bounds, constraint bounds and ensure objective and constraint values match within a relative tolerance.

> * The objective of implementations must be callable at the starting point and should not return NaN unless expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The objective of implementations must be callable at the starting point.
```
unless expected will be hard to check.

* Problems modeled with `ADNLPModels` should support the `nls=true/false` keyword to allow both `ADNLPModel` and `ADNLSModel` instantiation from the same problem.
* For least-squares problems, instantiate both `ADNLPModel` and `ADNLSModel` and ensure `residual!(nls, x, Fx)` is allocation-free with the objectives agree (or differ by a factor of 2 for LS).
* For variable-size problems, verify that different values of `n` produce correct `nvar`, meta formulas predict actual values and instantiation works at various sizes.

## Reviewer Checklist for New Problems

**Meta**

> - [ ] Every new problem (ADNLP or PureJuMP) is registered in Meta, with all fields (origin, objtype, contype, bounds, best-known, etc.) filled correctly.

Reviewer: Maybe link to an example

- [ ] Meta formulas for variable sizes match actual model behavior.

**Definition**
- [ ] No extra or spurious exports are introduced.
- [ ] Model name matches the file and function name.

**Implementation**

> - [ ] Objective and constraint values agree within tolerance at test points.

Reviewer: you are comparing AD and JuMP here?

- [ ] Number of variables and constraints match.

**Sanity**
- [ ] Objective is callable at the starting point and does not return NaN (unless documented).
- [ ] Model instantiates without error for all supported types (Float32, Float64).

> - [ ] For scalable problems, changing n updates nvar and all related meta fields.

Reviewer: the number of variables should be close to the given n also.

**Least-Squares & In-Place APIs**
- [ ] If least-squares, ADNLP constructor supports `nls=true/false` for both ADNLPModel and ADNLSModel.
- [ ] In-place nonlinear constraint evaluation (`nln!`) and least-squares residuals (`residual!`) are allocation-free.
- [ ] For least-squares, objectives for NLP and NLS agree (or differ by a factor of 2, as appropriate).

**Zero-Allocation**

> - [ ] All in-place APIs (constraints, residuals) are allocation-free (Julia ≥ 1.7).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] All in-place APIs (constraints, residuals) are allocation-free.
```
we anyway no longer support Julia < 1.10
